\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename icomplete-vertical.info
@settitle icomplete-vertical
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Icomplete-vertical: (icomplete-vertical). Display Icomplete completion candidates vertically.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title icomplete-vertical
@author Omar Antolín Camarena
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top icomplete-vertical
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Installation and usage::
* About Icomplete::
* Configuration for icomplete-vertical::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation and usage

* Quick setup with use-package::

Configuration for icomplete-vertical

* Maximum minibuffer height::
* Fixed or variable height minibuffer::
* The candidate separator::
* Defining your own vertical commands::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

This package defines a global minor mode to display Icomplete
completion candidates vertically.  You could get a vertical display
without this package, by using @samp{(setq icomplete-separator "\n")}, but
that has two problems which @samp{icomplete-vertical-mode} solves:

@enumerate
@item
Usually the minibuffer prompt and the text you type scroll off
to the left!  This conceals the minibuffer prompt, and worse,
the text you enter.

@item
The first candidate appears on the same line as the one you are
typing in. This makes it harder to visually scan the candidates
as the first one starts in a different column from the others.
@end enumerate

The screenshots explain this better than words can.

@node Installation and usage
@chapter Installation and usage

If you use MELPA, the easiest way to install @samp{icomplete-vertical} is via
@samp{package-install}. Alternatively, download @samp{icomplete-vertical.el}, put it
somewhere in your @samp{load-path}, and @samp{require} it. Turn the minor mode on or
off with @samp{M-x icomplete-vertical-mode}. It only does something when
@samp{icomplete-mode} is also active.

You might also want to bind @samp{icomplete-vertical-toggle} to some key in
the @samp{icomplete-minibuffer-map} keymap. I use @samp{C-v}, for ``vertical'', since
paging in the minibuffer isn't very useful. (Running
@samp{icomplete-vertical-toggle} has the same toggling effect as running
@samp{icomplete-vertical-mode}, except that it doesn't print a message in the
echo area disturbing your candidate display until the next keypress.)

@menu
* Quick setup with use-package::
@end menu

@node Quick setup with use-package
@section Quick setup with use-package

If you manage your configuration with @samp{use-package}, you can use this
form to install and configure @samp{icomplete-vertical}:

@lisp
(use-package icomplete-vertical
  :ensure t
  :demand t
  :custom
  (completion-styles '(partial-completion substring))
  (completion-category-overrides '((file (styles basic substring))))
  (read-file-name-completion-ignore-case t)
  (read-buffer-completion-ignore-case t)
  (completion-ignore-case t)
  :config
  (icomplete-mode)
  (icomplete-vertical-mode)
  :bind (:map icomplete-minibuffer-map
              ("<down>" . icomplete-forward-completions)
              ("C-n" . icomplete-forward-completions)
              ("<up>" . icomplete-backward-completions)
              ("C-p" . icomplete-backward-completions)
              ("C-v" . icomplete-vertical-toggle)))
@end lisp

A completion framework is probably something you don't want to defer
loading, that's what the  @samp{:demand t} is there for.

The settings shown in the @samp{:custom} part of the form are the ones I use,
but I'll stop short of recommending them, and instead just recommend
that you lookup those variables in the documentation and think about
what value you want for them.

The default keybindings for @samp{icomplete-forward-completions} and
@samp{icomplete-backward-completions} are C-. and C-, which are difficult to
use with some terminal emulators (they cause no problem at all for
graphical Emacs).

(The above block mixes configuration for @samp{icomplete-vertical}, @samp{icomplete}
and the built-in completion framework. A @samp{use-package} purist might want
to separate that into different @samp{use-package} forms.)

@node About Icomplete
@chapter About Icomplete

This package is meant to be used in conjunction with Icomplete, which
is a built-in Emacs completion UI (similar to Ido) that provides a
display of the completion candidates and interactive narrowing.
Icomplete has several configuration options but even just sticking
@samp{(icomplete-mode)} in your init file is enough to make it useful. The
documentation that comes with Emacs is a little sparse (see @samp{(info
"(Emacs)Icomplete")}), so for a demo and longer introduction see
Protesilaos Stavrou's @uref{https://youtu.be/vtwYIKUZwEM, icomplete video}.

Icomplete is a UI for the built-in completion system in Emacs which is
very customizable and has various styles of matching candidates
(notably including @samp{flex} completion starting from Emacs 27). See the
Completion section of the manual, particularly the subsections @samp{(info
"(Emacs)Completion Styles")} and @samp{(info "(Emacs)Completion Options")}.

@node Configuration for icomplete-vertical
@chapter Configuration for icomplete-vertical

@menu
* Maximum minibuffer height::
* Fixed or variable height minibuffer::
* The candidate separator::
* Defining your own vertical commands::
@end menu

@node Maximum minibuffer height
@section Maximum minibuffer height

The maximum number of lines you want to use to display candidates
during completion is determined by the variable
@samp{icomplete-vertical-prospects-height}, which you can customize. This was
made a separate variable from @samp{icomplete-prospects-height} because if
you use icomplete both horizontally and vertically you are likely to
want different values for the two settings.

@node Fixed or variable height minibuffer
@section Fixed or variable height minibuffer

You can control whether the minibuffer has a fixed height or grows and
shrinks as the number of candidates changes while using
@samp{icomplete-vertical-mode} completion. This is controlled by the
value  of the standard Emacs variable @samp{resize-mini-windows} at the time
@samp{icomplete-vertical-mode} is activated.

If @samp{resize-mini-windows} is set to @samp{t}, then the minibuffer will grow and
shrink depending on the number of candidates ---up to a maximum of
@samp{icomplete-vertical-prospects-height} lines of candidates.

On the other hand, if @samp{resize-mini-windows} is set to any other value
(either @samp{nil} or @samp{grow-only}) then @samp{icomplete-vertical-mode} will keep the
height fixed at @samp{icomplete-vertical-prospects-height} lines of
candidates.

@node The candidate separator
@section The candidate separator

The value of variable @samp{icomplete-vertical-separator} is used to separate
the candidates in vertical completion; it defaults to a single newline
and should always contain at least one newline. You can customize this
variable and the custom UI will offer some predefined choices: a
newline, a dashed line, a dotted line, a solid line.

The variable can be set to a string with text properties, such as
faces. If the string has any faces applied, they will be
respected. If, on the other hand, it has no faces at all, then the
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator} face will be applied to it. That face by
default simply inherits from the @samp{shadow} face used for deemphasized
text.

You can define named vertical completion separators by customizing
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator-alist}. The symbols used as keys in this
alist are valid values for @samp{icomplete-vertical-separator} and for
@samp{:separator} options in @samp{icomplete-vertical-do} (see below).

@node Defining your own vertical commands
@section Defining your own vertical commands

If you choose to use Icomplete horizontally by default but want to
define a few commands that leverage @samp{icomplete-vertical-mode}, use the
@samp{icomplete-vertical-do} macro.  Use this for lists with naturally long
candidates, such as filesystem paths or kill-ring entries.

For example, let's implement a command to yank from the kill-ring
using completion. Often the kills are multiline, so for improved
usability we'll need (1) the completion to start in vertical mode, (2)
the number of lines used to display entries to be relatively large,
and (3) the separator to be, say, a dotted line:

@lisp
(defun insert-kill-ring-item ()
  "Insert item from kill-ring, selected with completion."
  (interactive)
  (icomplete-vertical-do (:separator 'dotted-line :height 20)
    (insert (completing-read "Yank: " kill-ring nil t))))
@end lisp

Note that the completion merely @emph{starts out} in vertical mode: nothing
keeps you from toggling between vertical and horizontal while
@samp{insert-kill-ring-item} is active. Once the command finishes running,
your previous completion configuration will be restored.

Both the @samp{:separator} and @samp{:height} are optional and default to
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator} and to
@samp{icomplete-vertical-prospects-height}, respectively. If you omit both
parts you still need to include the empty parenthesis:
@samp{(icomplete-vertical-do () ...)}!.

Everything described above for the variable
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator}, applies equally to the separator passed
to @samp{icomplete-vertical-do}: if it is a symbol it is looked up in
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator-alist}; if it is a string it should
contain at least one newline, it can have text properties, such as
faces, which control the display, and if it has no faces it will have
@samp{icomplete-vertical-separator} face applied to it. For example, the
following specification makes a red dotted line:

@lisp
(:separator (propertize "\n··········\n" 'face '(:foreground "red"))
 :height 20)
@end lisp

This package contains the @samp{icomplete-vertical-do} macro for you to
implement your own commands. It does not define any commands that use
the macro.

@bye